---
index: 3
title: 3. Use Diagrams
author: Emily
headerDepth: 3
---

## 1 What Diagrams Are Useful?
::: tip Models are wrong
A common phrase in engineering is "all models are wrong - some are useful"

This statement indicates that just making a model or diagram does not make it useful and that no model or diagram can be the same exact thing as reality, only a reprentation. Therefore, it is a responsibility to consider what makes a model useful when deciding to create one.
:::

In the software context, some of the most common and useful diagrams are:

- **Flowcharts:** Flowcharts are used to represent workflows or processes in a system. They show the steps as boxes of various kinds, and their order by connecting them with arrows. They are often used to depict the logical steps a system should follow from start to finish.
- **UML Diagrams:** Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a standardized modeling language used to visualize the design of a system. UML diagrams can represent various aspects of a system, such as class diagrams for structure, sequence diagrams for interactions, and use case diagrams for requirements.
- **ER Diagrams:** Entity-Relationship (ER) diagrams are used to model data and how entities relate to each other within a database.
- **Sequence Diagrams:** Sequence diagrams show how objects interact with each other in a specific use case of the system. They illustrate how messages and tasks are passed between objects and in what order.
- **Architecture Diagrams:** These diagrams provide a high-level view of the system's structure. They can show how different components of the system interact with each other and with external systems.
- **Data Flow Diagrams:** Data flow diagrams show how data moves through a system, where it comes from, where it goes, and how it's processed.
- **Network Diagrams:** Network diagrams are used to represent the interaction between various devices in a network, including the internet, intranet, routers, servers, etc.

## 2 Suggestions for Using Diagrams for a Big Picture View

For many software contexts, useful diagrams that could create a big picture view are:
1. an overview system architecture (OV1)
2. a diagram of the dataflow (context diagram)

If your application uses business logic or third party code, consider creating an archimate diagram as well.

## 3 Tools for Creating Diagrams
Similarly to the grammar context, creating there are many external tools and course to help with creating useful diagrams. We have provided you some background and references to learn more.

- [Lucidchart](https://www.lucidchart.com/pages/) for making flow charts
- [Draw.io](https://www.drawio.com/) for making flow charts or system level diagrams
- [Microsoft PowerPoint](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/powerpoint) for generating high level system diagrams 



