---
index: 3
title: 3. How to Write Effective Documentation
author: Emily
headerDepth: 3
---

## 1. Writing is hard

::: info Which do you think is more difficult, writing new content, or editing existing content?
:::

::: details According to Frank Norris 
**"I hate writing, but I love having written"**
This is a famous quote attributed to various writers with Frank Norris as the possible originator.
:::

::: details According to Anne Lamott
“Almost all good writing begins with terrible first efforts. You need to start somewhere. Start by getting something—anything—down on paper." - Anne Lamott
:::

Frank Norris shares the sentiment that writing can be a challenging, unenjoyable, but rewarding task. Anne Lamott teaches that to face that challenge, one must jump in, and be willing to get the first, probably poorly contructed, words on paper.

**So, the first, and arguably the hardest step in writing is starting!** Jump in, get some thoughts written down, and feel free to make a bad first draft. Then, follow these sections to guide improvement to your writing so you can create effective software documentation.

## 2. Measuring Effective Documentation

Several case studies have remarked on the value and need for effective software
documentation, including a study which clearly defined the aributes most
useful in successful software engineering. Valued aspects of documentation from
the participants were accuracy, simplicity, readability, completeness, brevity, and
a need for a high-level view (Sumita et al., 2007)

We will take these values and break them down in sections to learn more. Feel free to 
learn from the sections in the order that works for you, and practice throughout the sections and at the end.

The sections are:
- [Be Concise](../concise/README.md)
- [Be Complete](../complete/README.md)
- [Be Accurate](../accurate/README.md)
- [Be Big Picture](../big-picture/README.md)